title: Soft-wars

subtitle: A Capital-as-Power Analysis of Google’s Differential Power Trajectory

author: Chris Mouré

abstract: The capital as power framework, developed by Jonathan Nitzan and Shimshon Bichler, argues that the aim of business is not ‘profit maximization’ but the differential accumulation of social power. Using this framework as a theoretical starting point, I analyze the differential accumulation strategies of  Google and Microsoft. I present qualitative and quantitative evidence demonstrating that, despite the fact that Google and Microsoft currently derive the majority of their profits from separate businesses (and so by conventional logic are not in direct competition with one another), the two firms are nonetheless engaged in antagonistic competition over control of the computing industry.

date: October 2021

paper_url: https://capitalaspower.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/moure_softwars_20211009.pdf

page_url: https://capitalaspower.com/2021/10/moure-soft-wars-a-capital-as-power-analysis-of-googles-differential-power-trajectory/

img_url: https://capitalaspower.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/moure_cover.png

cite: Mouré, Chris. 2021. ‘Soft-wars: A Capital-as-Power Analysis of Google’s Differential Power Trajectory’. <i>Review of Capital as Power</i>, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 71--90.

keywords: Google, big tech, Microsoft, Facebook, capitalization, differential accumulation, differential profit

author_info: Chris Mouré is a graduate student at York University. He can be reached at cjmoure@my.yorku.ca.

start_page: 71
